Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for
Decentralized Stable Matching

Kshitija Taywade, Judy Goldsmith, and Brent Harrison

University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
kshitija.taywade@uky.edu

goldsmit@cs.uky.edu
harrison@cs.uky.edu

Abstract. In the real world, people/entities usually find matches inde-
pendently and autonomously, such as finding jobs, partners, roommates,
etc. It is possible that this search for matches starts with no initial knowl-
edge of the environment. We propose the use of a multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning (MARL) paradigm for a spatially formulated decentralized
two-sided matching market with independent and autonomous agents.
Having autonomous agents acting independently makes our environment
very dynamic and uncertain. Moreover, agents lack the knowledge of pref-
erences of other agents and have to explore the environment and interact
with other agents to discover their own preferences through noisy rewards.
We think such a setting better approximates the real world and we study
the usefulness of our MARL approach for it. Along with conventional
stable matching case where agents have strictly ordered preferences, we
check the applicability of our approach for stable matching with incom-
plete lists and ties. We investigate our results for stability, level of insta-
bility (for unstable results), and fairness. Our MARL approach mostly
yields stable and fair outcomes.

Keywords: Stable Matching · Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning · De-
centralized System.

1 Introduction

Matching markets are prevalent in the real world, for example, matching of stu-
dents to colleges, doctors to hospitals, employees to employers, men and women,
etc. A two-sided market consists of two disjoint sets of agents. In a two-sided
stable matching problem, each participant has preferences over the participants
on the other side. A matching is stable if it does not contain a blocking pair. A
blocking pair is formed if two agents from disjoint sets prefer each other rather
than their current partner. Although, most of the prior literature focuses on
centralized algorithms where the entire set of preferences is known to some cen-
tral agency, having such a central clearinghouse is not always feasible. Therefore,
we consider a decentralized matching market with independent and autonomous
agents.

arXiv:2005.01117v3  [cs.LG]  4 Dec 2021



2 K. Taywade et al.

There have been several decentralized matching methods proposed in recent
years. However, many of them assume that the agents have knowledge of one
another’s preferences and can easily approach/contact each other, i.e., negligible
search friction. In reality, it takes time to meet a partner and to learn the value
of said partnership. Furthermore, there is seldom a scope for knowing the prefer-
ences of other agents. Also, it is a crucial task to locate and approach a potential
match, either by navigating physically or virtually. Several decentralized match-
ing markets, such as worker-employer markets and buyer-seller trading markets,
consist of locations at which matching agents may meet, be it physically or online.
The level of information, search cost, medium of interaction, and commitment
laws can vary across markets. Nonetheless, these are the important features of
decentralized markets. Some research works study the impact of these features
on the final outcomes for certain types of markets [5,22,23]. To better represent
these features, we propose a generalized matching problem in which agents are
placed in a grid world environment and must learn to navigate it in order to
form matches. We see this as a generalized case for matching problems. While it
contains the features described above, it does not conform to the standards set
by any individual market type.

There are multiple factors involved in deciding a preferred match in real-
world situations, and having a score for each match is more expressive. Thus, we
consider weighted preferences for a stable matching problem, which is discussed
in [8,13,24]. The weighted preference is used as the utility value (or reward)
for being in the match. These scores reflect the underlying preference order.
Agents are initially unaware of others’ preferences as well as of their own. In
many matching markets, knowledge acquisition is important: in labor markets,
employers interview workers; in matching markets, men and women date; and in
real estate markets, buyers attend open houses. We have taken this into account,
so an agent gets to know a noisy version of its utility for a match only after
being part of it. Noise represents uncertainty in the value of a partnership, e.g.,
the uncertain nature of human behavior in relationships.

Finding a long-term match in this scenario is quite a complex task. There-
fore, we propose multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) as an alternative
paradigm where agents must learn how to find a match based on their experiences
interacting with others. We equip each agent with their own reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) module. We use SARSA, a model-free, online RL algorithm. Instead
of a common reward signal, each agent has a separate intrinsic reward signal.
Therefore, we model this problem as a stochastic/Markov game [17], which is
useful in modeling multi-agent decentralized control where the reward function
is separate for each agent. Agents learn to operate in the environment with the
goal of increasing expected total reward, by getting into a long-term, stable, or
close-to-stable and fair match. We impose search cost as a small negative reward
(-1) for each step whenever an agent is not in a match.

We investigate the applicability of the MARL approach to the conventional
stable matching (SM) problem, as well as its extensions, such as stable match-
ings with incomplete lists (SMI), where agents are allowed to declare one or



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 3

more partners unacceptable [9], and stable matching with ties (SMT), where
agents have the same preference for more than one agent [9,12]. Moreover, we
study both the cases of symmetric and asymmetric preferences of agents towards
each other. Stability is one of the main measures in our investigation. We check
whether our method yields stable results and then to which stable matching
the method will converge if there are multiple stable matchings. As we have a
dynamic decentralized system with agents having incomplete information, it is
hard to guarantee stability for every instance. For unstable outcomes, we check
instability with three measures: the degree of instability calculates the number of
blocking agents, i.e., those agents who are part of blocking pairs [27]; the ratio of
instability gives the proportion of blocking pairs out of all possible pairs [6]; and
maximum dissatisfaction, which is the maximum difference between an agent’s
current utility and their obtainable utility by being part of the blocking pair.
Overall, we found that many of our outcomes are stable, or if not, they are close-
to-stable. Also, it is easy to get stable outcomes for instances with symmetric
preferences and harder for the asymmetric ones.

It is important for the outcome to be fair to all the agents, as the goal of the
agents is to increase only their own happiness. Therefore, we use three measures
of fairness: set-equality cost, regret cost, and egalitarian cost [9]. We compare
the fairness of our results to those of bidirectional local search, a centralized
approach, and two decentralized approaches: Hoepman’s algorithm [11], and a
decentralized algorithm by Comola and Fafchamps. Note that these algorithms
solve the much easier, non-spatial problems, usually with the assumptions of
complete information on the part of agents. Nonetheless, our approach performs
competitively in terms of fairness. Lastly, similar to [5], we check the proportion
of overall median stable matchings, as well as individual median matchings in
our results, which are other important measures of fairness.

2 Related Work

Reinforcement Learning has not been used for the decentralized two-sided stable
matching problem, but researchers have applied both RL and Deep RL mech-
anisms to solve coalition formation problems. This is closest to our work as
matching problems are a special case of coalition formation problems. In [1],
Bachrach et al. proposed a framework for training agents to negotiate and form
teams using deep reinforcement learning. They have also formulated the problem
spatially. Bayesian reinforcement learning has also been used for coalition forma-
tion problems [2,18]. Unlike most of the work in MARL approaches for coalition
formation and task allocation, our agents cannot communicate with each other
(although they can observe other agents in the same cell). Nonetheless, their
utilities get affected by the actions of other agents.

Researchers have studied several decentralized matching markets, and have
proposed frameworks for modeling them and techniques for solving them, and
have also analyzed different factors that affect the results [20,21,29,10,5,22,23,4].
Most of these works focus on job markets. Echenique and Yariv, in their study



4 K. Taywade et al.

of one-to-one matching markets, proposed a decentralized approach for which
stable outcomes are prevalent, but unlike our formulation of a problem, agents
have complete information of everyone’s preferences [5]. Unlike our work, none
of these works have formulated the problem spatially, and also, they have used
different methods than RL. Some distributed algorithms for weighted matching
include algorithms that are distributed in terms of agents acting on their own
either synchronously or asynchronously [11,33,15]. The crucial assumption in
these works is that agents already know their preferences over the members of
the opposite set and can directly contact other agents to propose matches.

Most of the decentralized methods mentioned here allow agents to make
matching offers and accept/reject such offers. While in our approach, an agent
shows interest in pairing with an agent from the other set that is present at the
same location, by selecting a relevant action. The agent’s state space represents
those agents from the opposite set that are present at the same cell location and
also which ones among them are interested in pairing. Agents get matched only
when both the agents select an action for pairing with each other. While this
may seem similar to making, accepting, or rejecting offers, it is not exactly the
same.

3 Preliminaries

Our two-sided stable matching problem consists of n agents divided equally into
two disjoint sets S1 and S2. These agents are placed randomly on the grid with
dimensions H × L. We investigate if agents can learn good matching policies in
a decentralized, spatial setting.

Definition 1. In the classical two-sided stable matching problem (SM),
each agent has a strict preference order p over the members of the other set.
Given matching M , the pair (i, j) with an agent i ∈ S1 and an agent j ∈ S2 is a
blocking pair for M , if i prefers j and j prefers i to their respective partners in
M . A matching is said to be stable if it does not contain any blocking pairs.

The preferences are expressed as weights and hence referred to as weighted
preferences. A weight/score represents the true utility value an agent may re-
ceive by being in a particular match. These weights still correspond to a strict
preference order for each agent. An agent only gets to know the utility from a
match when it is in that particular match. Even then, it only receives a noisy
utility value for that match rather than the true, underlying utility value. It
can be formally written as: for i ∈ S1 and j ∈ S2, agent i receives the utility
Uij ·C for being in a match with j, where C is the noise, sampled from a normal
distribution with mean µ = 1 and standard deviation σ = 0.1 and Uij is the
true utility value that agent i can get from a match with agent j. Agents still
have a strict preference order p over the agents on the other side. Uij is picked
uniformly from range [k, l] ∈ Z, while maintaining the strict preference order.

We also consider following two extensions of the SM problem.



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 5

Definition 2. The stable matching problem with incomplete preference
lists (SMI) may have incomplete preference lists for those involved. In this case,
the members of the opposite set who are unacceptable to an agent simply do not
appear in their preference list [9].

As we have a score based formulation, an agent has negative scores for unac-
ceptable agents of the other set.

Definition 3. Some agents may be indifferent (i.e., have the same utility) be-
tween two or more members of the opposite set. This is called the stable match-
ing problem with ties (SMT) [9,12].

We consider two types of preferences among agents: symmetric and asym-
metric.

For i ∈ S1 and j ∈ S2, let pi(j) (pj(i), respectively) denote the position of
i in j’s preference list (the position of j in i’s preference list, respectively). In
symmetric preferences, pi(j) = pj(i) (in our case, Uij = Uji as well), which
is not guaranteed to be the case in asymmetric preferences. With asymmet-
ric preferences (similar to random preferences in literature), there can be many
different stable matchings in a market. However, in the case of symmetric pref-
erences, there can be only one stable matching where each agent gets their best
choice. Our environment is dynamic and uncertain, and also, due to the narrow
difference between noisy utilities, it can be hard for agents to discriminate be-
tween their choices efficiently. This can cause unstable outcomes, especially for
asymmetric preferences. Therefore, if a stable outcome does not emerge, then
we investigate the nature of instability with the following three measures.

Definition 4. The degree of instability (DoI) of the matching is the number
of blocking agents, i.e., the agents that belong to some blocking pair [27].

Eriksson and Häggström pointed out that, rather than only looking for the
number of blocking agents, it can also be helpful to look at the number of
blocking partners of an agent, as it gives insight into how likely the agent will
exploit instability [6]. Their notion of instability is defined as follows.

Definition 5. For any matching M under preference structure P (m) on a set of
(m) (m)

m agents, let BP (M) denote the number of blocking pairs. Let B̂P (M) denote
(m) (m)

the proportion of blocking pairs: B̂P (M) = BP (M) / m2 [6].

While Eriksson and Häggström call this measure the ‘instability’ of the match-
ing M , we call it the ratio of instability (RoI). We also use a third measure,
maximum dissatisfaction (MD). It is inspired by the notion of α-stability in
[24] which is specific to SM with weighted preferences.

Definition 6. In matching M , for every blocking agent x, let y be their current
match and v be their partner in some blocking pair, then

MD(M) = max{Uxv − Uxy}.
(x,v)



6 K. Taywade et al.

Increase in this number may lead to exploitation of instability by agents in
the market. Stability in the outcomes does not guarantee fairness. We consider
three measures of fairness to check the quality of matchings as given in [9].

Definition 7. The regret cost, r(M) = max max {pi(j), pj(i)}.
(i,j)∈M

∑ ∑

Definition 8. The egalitarian cost, c(M) = pi(j) + pj(i).
(i,j)∈M (i,j)∈M

∑ ∑

Definition 9. The set-equality cost, d(M) = pi(j) − pj(i).
(i,j)∈M (i,j)∈M

Lower values for these measures indicate better quality of the matchings. Es-
pecially, low regret cost and set-equality cost indicate fairness among agents. It is
well known that the Gale-Shapley algorithm provides a matching that is optimal
for only one side, over all possible stable matchings. Thus, one notion of fairness
is to consider the median of the set of stable matchings, so as to privilege neither
set over the other. Thus, similar to [5], we check whether the final matchings
are median stable matchings (MSM), and overall, what proportion of individual
matches are median matches (MM). The well-known median property is first
discovered by Conway [9]. A median matching exists whenever there is an odd
number of stable outcomes. It is the matching that is in the middle of the two
sides’ orders of preference. Thus, the median stable matching represents some
sense of fairness as it balances the interests of both sides.

Definition 10. Let P be a preference profile with the set of stable matchings
S(P ). If K = |S(P )| is odd, the median stable matching (MSM) is a
matching M ∈ S(P ) such that for all agents a ∈ S1 ∪ S2, M(a) occupies the
K+1
2 th place in a’s preference among the agents in {M ′(a)|M ′ ∈ S(P )}. M(a)

is a’s median partner among a’s stable-matching partners [5]. While MSM is for
overall matching, median match (MM) refers to individual matches between
the agents, i.e., an individual agent being matched to its median stable match
partner.

Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

As mentioned earlier, we propose a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
approach that enables each agent to learn independently to find a good match
for itself. A reinforcement learning agent learns by interacting with its environ-
ment. The agent perceives the state of the environment and takes an action,
which causes the environment to transition into a new state at each time step.
The agent receives a reward reflecting the quality of each transition. The agent’s
goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward over time [30]. In our sys-
tem, although agents learn independently and separately, their actions affect the
environment and in turn affect the learning process of other agents as well. As
agents receive separate intrinsic rewards, we modeled our problem as a Markov
game. Stochastic/Markov games [17] are used to model multi-agent decentral-
ized control where the reward function is separate for each agent, as each agent
works only towards maximizing its own total reward.



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 7

A Markov game with n players specifies how the state of an environment
changes as the result of the joint actions of n players. The game has a finite
set of states S. The observation function O : S × {1, . . . , n} → Rd specifies a d-
dimensional view of the state space for each player. We write Oi = {oi|s ∈ S, oi =
O(s, i)} to denote the observation space of player i. From each state, players
take actions from the set {A1, . . . , An} (one per player). The state changes as
a result of the joint action 〈a1, ..., an〉 ∈ 〈A1, ..., An〉, according to a stochastic
transition function T : S × A1 × ... × An → ∆(S), where ∆(S) denotes the
set of probability distributions over S. Each player receives an individual reward
defined as ri : S×A1×...×An → R for player i. In our multi-agent reinforcement
learning approach, each agent learns independently, through its own experience,
a behavior policy πi: Oi → ∆(Ai) (denoted π(ai|oi)) based on its observation
oi and reward ri. Each agent’s goal is to find policy πi which maximizes a long
term discounted reward [30].

4 Method

We propose a MARL approach for decentralized two-sided stable matching prob-
lems that are formulated spatially on a grid. For each agent, the starting location
is picked uniformly randomly from the grid cells. As agents go through episodic
training, they start in this same cell location in each episode and explore the
environment. Agents must first find each other before they can potentially form
matches. This approximates the spatial reality of meeting with individuals (at,
e.g., bars or parties) or organizations (at, e.g., job fairs).

We believe that finding a partner for oneself is an independent task, where
agents do not necessarily need to compete or even co-operate. Agents only need
to learn to find a suitable partner. Each agent independently learns a policy using
the RL algorithm, SARSA [28,30], with a multi-layer perceptron as a function
approximator to learn the set of Q-values. An agent’s learning is independent of
other agents’ learning as all the agents have separate learning modules (neural
networks). We use SARSA because it is an on-policy algorithm in which agents
improve on the current policy. Unlike off-policy algorithms like deep Q-learning
where agents’ behavior while learning can be erratic due to inconsistencies in
the policy, on-policy algorithms follow the same policy and improve on it, which
is useful when the agent’s exploratory behavior matters. In real-world matching
markets, there is a value to the path of finding a final match. SARSA is also a
model-free algorithm, so that agents directly learn policies, without having to
learn the model.

While exploring, agents cannot perceive any part of the environment other
than their cell location. If an agent encounters another agent from the opposite
set in the same cell and both the agents show interest in matching with each
other, at the same time step, then they get matched. As agents can only view
their current grid cell, agents can only match with one another if they are in the
same cell. As long as agents are matched, they receive a noisy reward as a utility
value at each time step. This noise is sampled from the normal distribution and



8 K. Taywade et al.

the true utility value is multiplied by this noise. Note that our environment is
deterministic. We now describe the agents’ observation space, action space, and
reward function.

Observation space: An observation Oi for an agent i at time step t, let’s
say Oi[t], consists of three one-hot vectors. The first one represents an agent’s
position on the grid, the second vector represents which members of the opposite
set are present in the current cell, and third one shows if any of those agents
are interested in forming a match. The size of Oi is R×C +2 ·m, where R and
C are the number of rows and columns in the grid and m is the total number
of members of the opposite set. The size of the first hot vector is equal to the
total number of grid cells, and the size of the second and third vector is equal
to the size of the opposite set. Thus, an agent initially starts out knowing only
the dimensions of the grid and the total number of agents in the opposite set.

Action space: There are two types of actions available to an agent: navigating
the grid and expressing an interest in matching with an agent from the opposite
set. The action space is of size m + 4, where m is the size of the opposite set
and each member has an action associated with it for showing an interest in
matching with that member. There are 4 additional actions for navigating the
grid by moving up, down, left, and right. There is no specific action for staying
in the same grid cell because whenever an agent is interested in forming a match
with another agent, it automatically stays in the same cell. When two collocated
agents show an interest in forming a match with one another, then the match
is considered to be formed. Note that once a match is formed, the agents must
continue to express interest in each other at each time step in order to maintain
the match. If at some point, one ceases to express interest, the match is dissolved.

Reward Function: We have a noisy reward function described as: (1) −1 re-
ward for not being in a match. (2) The immediate reward received by an agent i
for a matching of agents i and j is Rij = Uij · C, where C is the noise, sampled
from a normal distribution with mean µ = 1 and standard deviation σ = 0.1
and Uij is the true utility value that agent i can get from a match with agent j.

Agents have prior knowledge of the grid size and the total number of agents
in the opposite set because of the way the states are constructed. However, they
completely lack the knowledge of the weighted preferences/utility values of other
agents. Furthermore, agents only get to know their own utility for an agent on
the other side when they get into a match with it, and that utility value is noisy.
In our setup, individuals may choose to be in a match until someone better comes
along or may choose to leave a match in order to explore further and look for
someone better. Thus, a time step in which all agents are paired is not necessarily
stable, because agents may break off a partnership to explore, or another, more
appealing agent may be willing to partner with them.



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 9

5 Experiments

In this section, we present the ways we tested our approach on stable matching
problems. Our main focus is on investigating the applicability of our MARL
approach. Along with the classical stable matching case (SM), we examine how
MARL performs on variations such as stable matching with incomplete lists
(SMI) and ties (SMT). We consider two types of preferences among agents: sym-
metric and asymmetric. As mentioned earlier, agents have weighted preferences
over agents on the other side. For an agent i ∈ S1, it can be seen as the utility
value Uij that it gets while in a match with agent j ∈ S2. In the case of SM
and SMT problems, these weights are generated from a uniform random distri-
bution in the range [1, 10]; for SMI, the weights are generated from a uniform
random distribution in the range [−10, 10] (negative weights indicate how much
one agent dislikes the other). For SM and SMI problems, the instances where
agents have weights reflecting the strictly ordered preferences are chosen for the
experiments. This constraint is removed while choosing SMT instances.

As we formulate the problems on a grid, we investigate results for increasingly
complex environments. This complexity is in terms of grid size and the number of
agents. We use grid sizes 3×3, 4×4, and 5×5 in combination with 8, 10, 12, and
14 agents as follows: (1) Grid: 3×3 ; Agents: 8; (2) Grid: 4×4 ; Agents: 8, 10, 12,
14; (3) Grid: 5×5 ; Agents: 8, 10, 12, 14. We do not place more than 8 agents on a
3×3 grid to keep a reasonable density of the population. We chose grid sizes such
that agents find other agents easily accessible. This is motivated by real-world
places like bars, parties, job fairs, etc. We think that our choices of grid size and
number of agents are sufficient to get the essence of realistic situations. Starting
cell locations of agents are chosen uniformly randomly from the grid cells, and
agents are placed back to these locations at the start of each episode. We run
experiments for every possible combination of matching problem variation (SM,
SMI, and SMT), preference type (symmetric and asymmetric), grid size, and
total agents. We implement 10 different instances of each of these combinations.
Each instance is generated by assigning weights between the agents uniformly
randomly while still maintaining the preference order if needed.

Parameter Settings: Each agent independently learns a policy using SARSA
[28,30] with a multi-layer perceptron as a function approximator to learn a set of
Q-values. Each network consists of 2 hidden layers with 50 and 25 hidden units,
respectively. We trained models using the Adam optimizer [16] with learning rate
10−4 to minimize TD-control loss. We used discount factor, γ = 0.9. We have
combined SARSA with experience replay for better results. The use of experience
replay along with SARSA has been proposed by Zhao et al. [34]. As SARSA is
an on-policy algorithm, we only used data from recent (last 10) episodes in our
experience replay buffer, which increased our performance over not using a replay
buffer. The number of training episodes and steps varies based on grid-size and
the total number of agents in an instance. The number of steps per episode
varies between 300–700 and training can take between 100k to 400k episodes to
converge. When there are multiple suitable matches available in the environment



10 K. Taywade et al.

for an agent, a proper exploration strategy is needed to find the best among them.
Therefore, we used exploration rate with non-linear decay, such that it is high
in the beginning but decays later (with a minimum exploration rate, ǫ = 0.05).
Learning rate and discount factor are fine tuned as the outcomes are slightly
sensitive to these hyper-parameters; however, results are robust to the changes
in other hyper-parameters.

We investigate stability and fairness of the outcomes. Roth hypothesized that
the success of a centralized labor market depends on whether the matchmaking
mechanism generates a stable matching [26]. Although we have decentralized
matching market, we think that stability is still an important measure of the
success. For the SM problem, stable matchings always exist, and for the SMI and
SMT problems, at least a weakly stable matching exists [14]. In weak stability,

( )

a blocking pair is defined as i, j such that M(i) 6= j, j ≻i M(i), and i ≻j

M(j) [14]. Note that in SMI instances, agents can end up without a partner as
incomplete lists make some potential matches unacceptable.

As we have a dynamic and uncertain environment and agents with incom-
plete knowledge, there is a scope for the rise of instability. Economic experi-
ments on decentralized matching markets with incomplete information [31,19]
have yielded outcomes with considerable instability. We use three more mea-
sures to study instability: the degree of instability (DoI), the ratio of instability
(RoI), and maximum dissatisfaction (MD) (details in Preliminaries). Stable or
close-to-stable solutions do not guarantee fairness, specifically for asymmetric
preference cases. As agents are independent and autonomous, we need to check
the efficacy of our approach from an individual agent’s point of view. Therefore,
we use three fairness measures: set-equality cost, regret cost, and egalitarian cost.
Additionally, we check the proportion of both median stable matchings as well as
individual median matches. We compare our results with both centralized and
decentralized algorithms. The comparison baselines are detailed below.
Bidirectional Local Search Algorithm (BLS) [32] is a centralized local
search algorithm for stable matching with set-equality. It uses the Gale-Shapley
algorithm [7] to compute S1-optimal and S2-optimal stable matchings and exe-
cutes bi-directional search from those matchings until the search frontiers meet.
Hoepman’s Algorithm (HA) [11] is a variant of the sequential greedy algo-
rithm [25] which computes a weighted matching at most a factor of two away
from the maximum. It is a distributed algorithm in which agents asynchronously
message each other.
Decentralized Algorithm by Comola and Fafchamps (D-CF) [3] is de-
signed to compute a matching in a decentralized market with deferred acceptance.
Deferred acceptance means an agent can be paired with several other partners in
the process of reaching their final match. This algorithm includes a sequence of
rounds in which agents take turns in making proposals to other agents, who can
accept or reject them. While Comola and Fafchamps focused on many-to-many
matching, the method can be easily adapted for one-to-one matching.

Note that not only BLS but also HA and D-CF are non-spatial algorithms
where agents already have knowledge of every other agent present in the system.



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 11

This gives them a significant advantage over the agents in our system, both be-
cause the agents know whom they prefer and because they have instantaneous
contact, rather than having to wander around in a grid world. Both of the de-
centralized algorithms use randomness while forming their final matching, giving
different results each time. Therefore, we run each instance 5 times and compare
to the average of those runs. We also run our MARL approach 5 times for each
instance. We discovered that if a stable outcome is found, the same one is found
consistently, but if not, then the outcomes vary.

6 Results and Discussion

We evaluate the results for stability, as well as the level of instability for unstable
outcomes. We use three measures to evaluate instability: the degree of instabil-
ity (DoI), the ratio of instability (RoI), and maximum dissatisfaction (MD). As
fairness in the outcomes is also important, we use three fairness measures: set-
equality cost, regret cost, and egalitarian cost. In addition to this, we check what
percent of the stable matchings are median stable matchings, as well as what
percent of the individual matches are median matches. Results for SM and SMT
problems with symmetric preferences and for SMI problem with both symmetric
and asymmetric preferences are straightforward, therefore, are mentioned in the
text. However, the results for SM and SMT problems with asymmetric prefer-
ences needed more analysis. We elaborate on the results of SM problem with
asymmetric preferences in Tables 1–3, as we think that this is the most relevant
and adverse case. Due to lack of space, we omitted the similar analysis of the
results for the SMT-asymmetric case; however, those results are very similar to
the ones presented for the SM-asymmetric case.

Grid 3× 3 4× 4 5× 5
Agents 8 8 10 12 14 8 10 12 14
Stability(%)100 92.0 82.0 68.0 56.0 80.0 74.0 54.0 46.0
DoI 0 2± 0.0 2± 0.0 3.3 ± 3.2 ± 2± 0.0 2.5 ± 2.8 ± 3.5 ±

1.3 1.7 1.1 0.9 1.6
RoI 0 0.04 ± 0.04 ± 0.06 ± 0.07 ± 0.04 ± 0.04 ± 0.05 ± 0.07 ±

0.0 0.0 0.01 0.02 0.0 0.01 0.02 0.03
MD 0 1.75 ± 2.89 ± 3.13 ± 3.89 ± 2.33 ± 2.77 ± 3.25 ± 4.44 ±

0.9 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 2.3
MM(%) 83.1 73.2 65.3 63.4 52.4 75.0 67.1 58.9 48.7

Table 1. For SM (asymmetric) case, MARL results on stability (%), instability mea-
sures (Avg ± Std) and median matches (%).

Many of our outcomes are stable or close-to-stable. For SM problem with
symmetric preferences, there is only one possible stable matching, and all the
outcomes converge to that. However, for asymmetric preferences, more than one



12 K. Taywade et al.

stable matching is possible. The instances with symmetric preferences converge
faster than the asymmetric ones. The instances of SM and SMT with asym-
metric preferences take longer to converge, with lower rates of convergence to
stability. The results of SM and SMT are similar. Additionally, for SM asym-
metric instances, we have observed that the agents disliked by everyone in the
opposite set (low utility associated with them by everyone) find it difficult to
get a long-term match. Similarly, unsurprisingly, the most-liked agent (high util-
ity associated with them by everyone) easily settles with its ideal match. We
also noticed that the noise in utilities adversely affects convergence to stable
outcomes.

When it comes to SMI, our results are always stable. The number of agents
that are matched is the maximum possible. This is important because when
agents have incomplete lists (negative utilities for matches), it is hard to get a
match for everyone, even though it is easier for some agents to find stable partner
due to fewer choices. Here, the final outcome always has the lowest regret cost.
Importantly, between the agents in the matched pair, there can be an agent
having zero utility towards its match, while the other agent still has positive
utility for the same match. As the agent with positive utility tries to get in a
match, having noise in the reward causes the agent with zero utility to stick to
the match. Note that this does not happen when both the agents in the match
have zero utility for the match, as neither of them tries to stick with the match.

Set-equality Cost; d(M) Regret Cost; r(M)
N MARL MARL MARL MARL

(4× 4) (5× 5) BLS HA D-CF (4× 4) (5× 5) BLS HA D-CF
8 3.1 ± 3.9 ± 2.9 ± 2.6 ± 3.1 ± 3.6 ± 3.5 ± 3.5 ± 3.7 ± 3.5 ±

2.4 2.5 2.1 1.8 1.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8
10 2.9 ± 3.2 ± 3±2.8 3.5 ± 4±2.7 4.3 ± 4.1 ± 4±0.8 4.6 ± 4.2 ±

2.1 2.8 1.6 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.9
12 4.6 ± 6.6 ± 5±4.2 4±4.2 4±4.2 5.4 ± 5.3 ± 5.1 ± 5.3 ± 5.1 ±

3.5 3.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.1 0.9
14 7± 9.2 7.4 ± 7.5 ± 7.2 ± 7.5 ± 6.7 ± 5.9 ± 5.7 ± 5.6 ± 5.7 ±

7.7 4.9 4.4 4.9 0.7 1.3 1.1 1.0 1.1
Table 2. For SM (asymmetric) case, comparison of set-equality cost and regret cost
in (Avg ± Std) format; results for 8 agents on 3 × 3 grid not included due to limited
space.

From Table 1, which elaborates on the results of the SM-asymmetric case,
we can see that the curse of dimensionality in how the number of agents affects
stability. Although the grid size also affects stability, its impact is much less. Both
of these factors affect the convergence rate as well: more complex environments
take longer to converge. The environment with 8 agents on a 3 × 3 grid is the
easiest one for training agents, and 100% of the outcomes are stable, while the
one with 14 agents on a 5 × 5 grid is the hardest to train and the stability of



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 13

Egalitarian Cost; c(M)
N MARL MARL

(4× 4) (5× 5) BLS HA D-CF
8 15.3 ± 2.8 15.1± 2.3 15.5 ± 2.7 16.6± 2.8 15.5 ± 2.7
10 20.3 ± 2.7 20.4± 3.4 19.8 ± 2.8 25.1± 3.7 20.4 ± 2.9
12 31± 5.9 28.4± 4.6 27.6 ± 3.4 32.6± 5.1 27.8 ± 3.3
14 41.4 ± 6.1 39.4± 5.6 34.9 ± 3.5 41.2± 6.9 34.9 ± 3.5

Table 3. For SM (asymmetric) case, comparison of egalitarian cost in (Avg ± Std)
format.

the final outcomes declined significantly to 46%. Nonetheless, we can also see
from the measures of instability that the outcomes are close-to-stable. Note that
in Table 1 the values associated with these measures are averaged over only
unstable outcomes. The average number of blocking agents (DoI) is low in all
cases. We also checked the proportion of blocking pairs (RoI), as the greater
this number, the more likely that blocking agents will discover and exploit the
instability at some point [6]. Our approach does well for this measure. This
follows the suggestion by Eriksson and Häggström that if agents increase the
search effort rather than picking random partners, then we can expect outcomes
to have a very small proportion of blocking pairs [6].

Furthermore, we look at the maximum dissatisfaction (MD) that an agent
can have for an outcome, as great dissatisfaction may also lead to exploiting
instability. This number is also low, which assures that there is a low likelihood
of blocking agents exploiting unstable outcomes in the market. We think that the
dynamic and uncertain environment, incomplete information, noisy utilities, and
the narrow differences in the utilities between matches found for an individual
over different episodes are potential reasons behind the emergence of instability
in the outcomes. Especially in the case of asymmetric preferences, it is unlikely
that an agent’s ideal partner also best prefers that agent.

In Tables 2 and 3, we compare fairness in the outcomes with three other
algorithms. Here, we can see that MARL performs competitively, and there is
no significant difference between the fairness results. The regret cost of MARL
is slightly, but not significantly, higher for all the types of instances. Hoepman’s
algorithm (HA) and the decentralized algorithm by Comola and Fafchamps (D-
CF) are decentralized approaches. While D-CF always produces stable outcomes,
that may not be the case with HA. Our approach performed better than HA
in almost all the cases and very similarly to the D-CF algorithm. Again, our
approach performs well despite being implemented on a fundamentally more
complex formulation of the problem than the ones for HA and D-CF. Further,
when our outcomes are stable, they usually match with those found by BLS.
It shows that despite the decentralization, our MARL approach is capable of
producing outcomes as good as those found by a central agency. This is further
supported by the fact that the good proportion of individual matches are median
matches (shown in Table 1). Also, approximately half of the stable matchings are
median stable matchings. We think that the fairness is achieved because agents



14 K. Taywade et al.

are self-interested and independent, and the stability is achieved as agents learn
to find their best viable matches.

The learned policies include agents moving to a fixed location from their
starting point and getting into a match corresponding to the final outcome.
It is possible that more than one pair is formed at the same location, but it
is rare. The location where agents in a pair move to form the match is not
necessarily the mid-point of the distance between starting points of two agents,
nor is it guaranteed to be close to either starting point. Centralized algorithms
do not work on a grid; they produce matchings but not the learned policies. This
shows that the real-world entities can benefit from using our MARL approach
to learn to efficiently navigate the environment in finding and maintaining the
good match.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

We have shown that the MARL paradigm can be successfully used for decentral-
ized stable matching problems that are formulated spatially in a dynamic and
uncertain environment, with independent and autonomous agents having min-
imum initial knowledge. Our MARL approach is also applicable for variations
such as SM with incomplete lists and ties. Agents tend to be happy with their
final matches, as outcomes are stable or close-to-stable and fair for everyone.
Even with unstable outcomes, agents are less likely to exploit instability. In fu-
ture work, we plan to work on bigger instances, environments where agents can
arbitrarily enter and exit the matching market, and investigate environments
where a few agents can learn while others have a fixed policy.

References

1. Bachrach, Y., Everett, R., Hughes, E., Lazaridou, A., Leibo, J., Lanctot, M., Jo-
hanson, M., Czarnecki, W., Graepel, T.: Negotiating team formation using deep
reinforcement learning (2018)

2. Chalkiadakis, G., Boutilier, C.: Bayesian reinforcement learning for coalition for-
mation under uncertainty. In: Proc. AAMAS ’04. pp. 1090–1097 (2004)

3. Comola, M., Fafchamps, M.: An experimental study on decentralized networked
markets. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 145, 567–591 (2018)

4. Diamantoudi, E., Miyagawa, E., Xue, L.: Decentralized matching: The role of com-
mitment. Games and Economic Behavior 92, 1–17 (2015)

5. Echenique, F., Yariv, L.: An experimental study of decentralized matching (2012)
6. Eriksson, K., Häggström, O.: Instability of matchings in decentralized markets

with various preference structures. International Journal of Game Theory 36(3-4),
409–420 (2008)

7. Gale, D., Shapley, L.S.: College admissions and the stability of marriage. The
American Mathematical Monthly 69(1), 9–15 (1962)

8. Gusfield, D.: Three fast algorithms for four problems in stable marriage. SIAM
Journal on Computing 16(1), 111–128 (1987)

9. Gusfield, D., Irving, R.W.: The stable marriage problem: structure and algorithms.
MIT press (1989)



MARL for Decentralized Stable Matching 15

10. Haeringer, G., Wooders, M.: Decentralized job matching. International Journal of
Game Theory 40(1), 1–28 (2011)

11. Hoepman, J.H.: Simple distributed weighted matchings. arXiv cs/0410047 (2004)
12. Irving, R.W.: Stable marriage and indifference. Discrete Applied Mathematics

48(3), 261–272 (1994)
13. Irving, R.W., Leather, P., Gusfield, D.: An efficient algorithm for the “optimal”

stable marriage. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 34(3), 532–543 (1987)
14. Iwama, K., Miyazaki, S.: A survey of the stable marriage problem and its vari-

ants. In: International Conference on Informatics Education and Research for
Knowledge-Circulating Society. pp. 131–136. IEEE Computer Society (Jan 2008)

15. Khan, A., Pothen, A., Mostofa Ali Patwary, M., Satish, N.R., Sundaram, N.,
Manne, F., Halappanavar, M., Dubey, P.: Efficient approximation algorithms for
weighted b-matching. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 38(5), S593–S619
(2016)

16. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)

17. Littman, M.L.: Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. In: Machine learning proceedings 1994, pp. 157–163. Elsevier (1994)

18. Matthews, T., Ramchurn, S.D., Chalkiadakis, G.: Competing with humans at fan-
tasy football: Team formation in large partially-observable domains. In: Twenty-
Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. aaai.org (2012)

19. Niederle, M., Roth, A.E.: Making markets thick: How norms governing exploding
offers affect market performance. preprint (2006)

20. Niederle, M., Yariv, L.: Matching through decentralized markets. Discussion Paper,
Stanford University (2007)

21. Niederle, M., Yariv, L.: Decentralized matching with aligned preferences. Tech.
rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2009)

22. Pais, J., Pintér, A., Veszteg, R.F.: Decentralized matching markets: a laboratory
experiment (2012)

23. Pais, J., Pintér, Á., Veszteg, R.F.: Decentralized matching markets with (out) fric-
tions: a laboratory experiment. Experimental Economics pp. 1–28 (2017)

24. Pini, M.S., Rossi, F., Venable, K.B., Walsh, T.: Stability and optimality in match-
ing problems with weighted preferences. In: Agents and Artificial Intelligence. pp.
319–333. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2013)

25. Preis, R.: Linear time 1/2-approximation algorithm for maximum weighted match-
ing in general graphs. In: STACS 99. pp. 259–269. Springer Berlin Heidelberg
(1999)

26. Roth, A.E.: A natural experiment in the organization of entry-level labor markets:
regional markets for new physicians and surgeons in the United Kingdom. The
American Economic Review pp. 415–440 (1991)

27. Roth, A.E., Xing, X.: Turnaround time and bottlenecks in market clearing: De-
centralized matching in the market for clinical psychologists. Journal of political
Economy 105(2), 284–329 (1997)

28. Rummery, G.A., Niranjan, M.: On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems,
vol. 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering England (1994)

29. Satterthwaite, M., Shneyerov, A.: Dynamic matching, two-sided incomplete infor-
mation, and participation costs: Existence and convergence to perfect competition.
Econometrica 75(1), 155–200 (2007)

30. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press
(2018)



16 K. Taywade et al.

31. Ünver, M.U.: On the survival of some unstable two-sided matching mechanisms.
International Journal of Game Theory 33(2), 239–254 (2005)

32. Viet, H.H., Trang, L.H., Lee, S., Chung, T.: A bidirectional local search for the sta-
ble marriage problem. In: 2016 International Conference on Advanced Computing
and Applications (ACOMP). pp. 18–24. ieeexplore.ieee.org (Nov 2016)

33. Wattenhofer, M., Wattenhofer, R.: Distributed weighted matching. In: Distributed
Computing. pp. 335–348. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2004)

34. Zhao, D., Wang, H., Shao, K., Zhu, Y.: Deep reinforcement learning with experi-
ence replay based on SARSA. In: 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI). pp. 1–6. IEEE (2016)